=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

Types::Numbers - Type constraints for numbers

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Because we deal with numbers every day in our programs and modules, this is an extensive L<Type::Tiny> library of number validations.
Like L<Type::Tiny>, these types work with all modern OO platforms and as a standalone type system.

=head1 TYPES

=head2 Overview

All of these types strive for the accurate storage and validation of many different types of numbers, including some storage types
that Perl doesn't natively support.

The hierarchy of the types is as follows:

    (T:S = From Types::Standard)
 
    Item (T:S)
       Defined (T:S)
          NumLike
             NumRange[`n, `p]
             IntLike
                SignedInt[`b]
                UnsignedInt[`b]
             PerlNum
                PerlSafeInt
                PerlSafeFloat
             BlessedNum[`d]
                BlessedInt[`d]
                BlessedFloat[`d]
             NaN
             Inf[`s]
             FloatSafeNum
                FloatBinary[`b, `e]
                FloatDecimal[`d, `e]
             RealNum
                RealSafeNum
                   FixedBinary[`b, `s]
                   FixedDecimal[`d, `s]
 
          Value (T:S)
             Str (T:S)
                Char[`b]

=head2 Basic types

=head3 NumLike

Behaves like C<<< LaxNum >>> from L<Types::Standard>, but will also accept blessed number types.  Unlike C<<< StrictNum >>>, it will accept C<<< NaN >>>
and C<<< Inf >>> numbers.

=head3 NumRange[`n, `p]

Only accepts numbers within a certain range.  The two parameters are the minimums and maximums, inclusive.

=head3 PerlNum

Exactly like C<<< LaxNum >>>, but with a different parent.  Only accepts unblessed numbers.

=head3 BlessedNum

Only accepts blessed numbers.  A blessed number would be using something like L<Math::BigInt> or L<Math::BigFloat>.  It doesn't
directly C<<< isa >>> check those classes, just that the number is blessed.

=head3 BlessedNum[`d]

A blessed number that supports at least certain amount of digit accuracy.  The blessed number must support the C<<< accuracy >>> or
C<<< div_scale >>> method.

For example, C<<< BlessedNum[40] >>> would work for the default settings of L<Math::BigInt>, and supports numbers at least as big as
128-bit integers.

=head3 NaN

A "not-a-number" value, either embedded into the Perl native float or a blessed C<<< NaN >>>, checked via C<<< is_nan >>>.

=head3 Inf

An infinity value, either embedded into the Perl native float or a blessed C<<< Inf >>>, checked via C<<< is_inf >>>.

=head3 Inf[`s]

    Inf['+']
    Inf['-']

An infinity value with a certain sign, either embedded into the Perl native float or a blessed C<<< Inf >>>, checked via C<<< is_inf >>>.  The
parameter must be a plus or minus character.

=head3 RealNum

Like L</NumLike>, but does not accept NaN or Inf.  Closer to the spirit of C<<< StrictNum >>>, but accepts blessed numbers as well.

=head2 Integers

=head3 IntLike

Behaves like C<<< Int >>> from L<Types::Standard>, but will also accept blessed number types and integers in E notation.  There are no
expectations of storage limitations here.  (See L</SignedInt> for that.)

=head3 PerlSafeInt

A Perl (unblessed) integer number than can safely hold the integer presented.  This varies between 32-bit and 64-bit versions of Perl.

For example, for most 32-bit versions of Perl, the largest integer than can be safely held in a 4-byte NV (floating point number) is
C<<< 9007199254740992 >>>.  Numbers can go higher than that, but due to the NV's mantissa length (accuracy), information is lost beyond
this point.

In this case, C<<< ...992 >>> would pass and C<<< ...993 >>> would fail.

(Technically, the max integer is C<<< ...993 >>>, but we can't tell the difference between C<<< ...993 >>> and C<<< ...994 >>>, so the cut
off point is C<<< ...992 >>>, inclusive.)

Be aware that Perls compiled with "long doubles" have a unique problem with storage and information loss: their number form maintains
accuracy while their (default) stringified form loses information.  For example, take the max safe integer for a long double:

    $num = 18446744073709551615;
    say $num;                 # 1.84467440737095516e+19
    say $num == 18446744073709551615;  # true, so the full number is still there
    say sprintf('%u', $num);  # 18446744073709551615

These numbers are considered safe for storage.  If this is not preferred, consider a simple C<<< /e/ >>> check for stringified E notation.

=head3 BlessedInt

A blessed number than is holding an integer.  (A L<Math::BigFloat> with an integer value would still pass.)

=head3 BlessedInt[`d]

A blessed number holding an integer of at most C<<< `d >>> digits (inclusive).  The blessed number container must also have digit accuracy
to support this number.  (See L</BlessedNum[`d]>.)

=head3 SignedInt

A signed integer (blessed or otherwise) that can safely hold its own number.  This is different than C<<< IntLike >>>, which doesn't check
for storage limitations.

=head3 SignedInt[`b]

A signed integer that can hold a C<<< `b >>> bit number and is within those boundaries.  One bit is reserved for the sign, so the max limit
on a 32-bit integer is actually C<<< 2**31-1 >>> or C<<< 2147483647 >>>.

=head3 UnsignedInt

Like L</SignedInt>, but with a minimum boundary of zero.

=head3 UnsignedInt[`b]

Like L</SignedInt[`b]>, but for unsigned integers.  Also, unsigned integers gain their extra bit, so the maximum is twice as high.

=head2 Floating-point numbers

=head3 PerlSafeFloat

A Perl native float that is in the "integer safe" range, or is a NaNE<sol>Inf value.

This doesn't guarantee that every single fractional number is going to retain all of its information here.  It only guarantees that
the whole number will be retained, even if the fractional part is partly or completely lost.

=head3 BlessedFloat

A blessed number that will support fractional numbers.  A L<Math::BigFloat> number will pass, whereas a L<Math::BigInt> number will
fail.  However, if that L<Math::BigInt> number is capable of upgrading to a L<Math::BigFloat>, it will pass.

=head3 BlessedFloat[`d]

A float-capable blessed number that supports at least certain amount of digit accuracy.  The number itself is not boundary checked, as
it is excessively difficult to figure out the exact dimensions of a floating point number.  It would also not be useful for numbers
like C<<< 0.333333... >>> to fail checks.

=head3 FloatSafeNum

A Union of L</PerlSafeFloat> and L</BlessedFloat>.  In other words, a float-capable number with some basic checks to make sure
information is retained.

=head3 FloatBinary[`b, `e]

A floating-point number that can hold a C<<< `b >>> bit number with C<<< `e >>> bits of exponent, and is within those boundaries (or is NaNE<sol>Inf).
The bit breakdown follows traditional IEEE 754 floating point standards.  For example:

    FloatBinary[32, 8] =
       32 bits total (`b)
       23 bit  mantissa (significand precision)
        8 bit  exponent (`e)
        1 bit  sign (+/-)

Unlike the C<<< *Int >>> types, if Perl's native number cannot support all dimensions of the floating-point number without losing
information, then unblessed numbers are completely off the table.  For example, assuming a 32-bit machine:

    (UnsignedInt[64])->check( 0 )        # pass
    (UnsignedInt[64])->check( 2 ** 30 )  # pass
    (UnsignedInt[64])->check( 2 ** 60 )  # fail, because 32-bit NVs can't safely hold it
 
    (FloatBinary[64, 11])->check( 0 )    # fail
    (FloatBinary[64, 11])->check( $any_unblessed_number )  # fail

=head3 FloatDecimal[`d, `e]

A floating-point number that can hold a C<<< `d >>> digit number with C<<< `e >>> digits of exponent.  Modeled after the IEEE 754 "decimal" float.
Rejects all Perl NVs that won't support the dimensions.  (See L</FloatBinary[`b, `e]>.)

=head2 Fixed-point numbers

=head3 RealSafeNum

Like L</FloatSafeNum>, but rejects any NaNE<sol>Inf.

=head3 FixedBinary[`b, `s]

A fixed-point number, represented as a C<<< `b >>> bit integer than has been shifted by C<<< `s >>> digits.  For example, a
C<<< FixedBinary[32, 4] >>> has a max of C<<< 2**31-1 / 10**4 = 214748.3647 >>>.  Because integers do not hold NaNE<sol>Inf, this type fails
on those.

Otherwise, it has the same properties and caveats as the parameterized C<<< Float* >>> types.

=head3 FixedDecimal[`d, `s]

Like L</FixedBinary[`b, `s]>, but for a C<<< `d >>> digit integer.  Or, you could think of C<<< `d >>> and C<<< `s >>> as accuracy (significant
figures) and decimal precision, respectively.

=head2 Characters

Characters are basically encoded numbers, so there's a few types here.  If you need types that handle multi-length strings, you're
better off using L<Types::Encodings>.

=head3 Char

A single character.  Unicode is supported, but it must be decoded first.  A multi-byte character that Perl thinks is two separate
characters will fail this type.

=head3 Char[`b]

A single character that fits within C<<< `b >>> bits.  Unicode is supported, but it must be decoded first.

=head1 AVAILABILITY

The project homepage is L<https://github.com/SineSwiper/Types-Numbers>.

The latest version of this module is available from the Comprehensive Perl
Archive Network (CPAN). Visit L<http://www.perl.com/CPAN/> to find a CPAN
site near you, or see L<https://metacpan.org/module/Types::Numbers/>.

=for :stopwords cpan testmatrix url annocpan anno bugtracker rt cpants kwalitee diff irc mailto metadata placeholders metacpan

=head1 SUPPORT

=head2 Internet Relay Chat

You can get live help by using IRC ( Internet Relay Chat ). If you don't know what IRC is,
please read this excellent guide: L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Relay_Chat>. Please
be courteous and patient when talking to us, as we might be busy or sleeping! You can join
those networks/channels and get help:

=over 4

=item *

irc.perl.org

You can connect to the server at 'irc.perl.org' and talk to this person for help: SineSwiper.

=back

=head2 Bugs / Feature Requests

Please report any bugs or feature requests via L<https://github.com/SineSwiper/Types-Numbers/issues>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brendan Byrd <BBYRD@CPAN.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is Copyright (c) 2013 by Brendan Byrd.

This is free software, licensed under:

  The Artistic License 2.0 (GPL Compatible)

=cut
